Measurement is an experimental process that produces a value that can reasonably be attributed to a quantitative property of a phenomenon, body, or substance.

This property that is the object of measurement (measurand) has a numerical magnitude and a reference that gives meaning to that numerical magnitude: for example, the mass of the International Prototype Kilogram is 1 kg.

That process involves direct or indirect comparison with a standard (for example, a certified 32768 Hz quartz crystal resonator, or a primary gas mixture with 1.079 micromole of methane per mole of air).

This comparison typically is accomplished by making the phenomenon, body, or substance of interest interact with a measuring instrument capable of producing an indication that is responsive to the property of interest. If the instrument has been calibrated, then the indications that it produces are meaningful in relation with a relevant standard.

The GUM defines measurement uncertainty as a "parameter, associated with the result of a measurement, that characterizes the dispersion of the values that could reasonably be attributed to the measurand''. The VIM defines it as a "non-negative parameter characterizing the dispersion of the quantity values being attributed to a measurand, based on the information used''.

For scalar measurands (that is, when the property of interest can be quantified by a single real number), the VIM suggests that this parameter may be, for example, a standard deviation called standard measurement uncertainty (or a specified multiple of it), or the half-width of an interval that includes the measurand with a stated coverage probability. (The expression standard measurement uncertainty is reserved for measurement uncertainty expressed as a standard deviation.)

This suggestion follows from the position that measurement uncertainty expresses incomplete knowledge about the measurand, and that a probability distribution over the set of possible values for the measurand is used to represent the corresponding state of knowledge about it: in these circumstances, the standard deviation aforementioned is an attribute of this probability distribution that represents its scatter over the range of possible values.