Divergent boundaries occur along spreading centers where plates are moving apart and new crust is created by magma pushing up from the mantle.

Picture two giant conveyor belts, facing each other but slowly moving in opposite directions as they transport newly formed oceanic crust away from the ridge crest.

Perhaps the best known of the divergent boundaries is the Mid-Atlantic Ridge.

This submerged mountain range, which extends from the Arctic Ocean to beyond the southern tip of Africa, is but one segment of the global mid-ocean ridge system that encircles the Earth.

The rate of spreading along the Mid-Atlantic Ridge averages about 2.5 centimeters per year (cm/yr), or 25 km in a million years.

This rate may seem slow by human standards, but because this process has been going on for millions of years, it has resulted in plate movement of thousands of kilometers.

Seafloor spreading over the past 100 to 200 million years has caused the Atlantic Ocean to grow from a tiny inlet of water between the continents of Europe, Africa, and the Americas into the vast ocean that exists today.

The volcanic country of Iceland, which straddles the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, offers scientists a natural laboratory for studying on land the processes also occurring along the submerged parts of a spreading ridge.

Iceland is splitting along the spreading center between the North American and Eurasian Plates, as North America moves westward relative to Eurasia.

The consequences of plate movement are easy to see around Krafla Volcano, in the northeastern part of Iceland.

Here, existing ground cracks have widened and new ones appear every few months.

From 1975 to 1984, numerous episodes of rifting (surface cracking) took place along the Krafla fissure zone.

Some of these rifting events were accompanied by volcanic activity; the ground would gradually rise 1-2 m before abruptly dropping, signalling an impending eruption.

Between 1975 and 1984, the displacements caused by rifting totalled about 7 m.

In East Africa, spreading processes have already torn Saudi Arabia away from the rest of the African continent, forming the Red Sea.

The actively splitting African Plate and the Arabian Plate meet in what geologists call a triple junction, where the Red Sea meets the Gulf of Aden.

A new spreading center may be developing under Africa along the East African Rift Zone.

When the continental crust stretches beyond its limits, tension cracks begin to appear on the Earth's surface.

Magma rises and squeezes through the widening cracks, sometimes to erupt and form volcanoes.

The rising magma, whether or not it erupts, puts more pressure on the crust to produce additional fractures and, ultimately, the rift zone.