Earth is the only world that we know of that has life. All of the plants and animals and microbes and other living things on Earth have evolved here. So, for us to understand where life as we know it came from, we need to understand where our planet came from.

The Sun and the planets and all of the other stuff in our solar system all formed from a really big cloud of gas and dust in space. We call such a cloud a “nebula” and more than one of them we refer to as “nebulae.” There are nebulae all around our galaxy, and it’s from these nebulae that stars and planets form. Nebulae are massive clouds of dust and debris in space and have all the ingredients to form stars and planets. When enough material is available, it begins to stick together forming a large mass. In time, the mass can grow large enough to form a planet or even a new star.

We currently think that our solar system formed from a large nebula, perhaps after the explosion of a nearby star. Some big stars can explode, something called a supernova, and that explosion has enough energy to make the gas and dust in nearby nebulae start swirling and spinning about. As this happened, it caused a lot of the material in the nebula to fall into its center, and that’s where the Sun started forming. Meanwhile, the rest of the gas and dust in the nebula began colliding and sticking together, making little pieces of metal and rock. Those small pieces then collided with each other, forming larger pieces, which then collided with each other to form even larger ones. These were young planets, and eventually, over a long time and through many, many collisions, our eight planets were formed – Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.

We call the pattern that the planets make when they go around the Sun an “orbit.” Well, when the planets were first forming from that cloud in space, the cloud itself was spinning in the same direction as the orbits of the planets today, with the Sun forming in the middle and also spinning in the same direction. That’s why we see the planets moving around the Sun the way that they do today!

You might also know that the Moon orbits around Earth. For something to be a moon, it needs to be in orbit around a planet. One thing that makes a planet is that a planet has to be orbiting a star. But star systems also have orbits. They orbit around their entire galaxy. So, orbits are really important for us to learn about if we want to know where we came from.