Jet streams are narrow bands of strong wind that generally blow from west to east all across the globe.

Earth has four primary jet streams: two polar jet streams, near the north and south poles, and two subtropical jet streams closer to the equator.

Jet streams form when warm air masses meet cold air masses in the atmosphere.

The Sun doesn’t heat the whole Earth evenly. That’s why areas near the equator are hot and areas near the poles are cold.

So when Earth’s warmer air masses meet cooler air masses, the warmer air rises up higher in the atmosphere while cooler air sinks down to replace the warm air. This movement creates an air current, or wind.

A jet stream is a type of air current that forms high in the atmosphere.

On average, jet streams move at about 110 miles per hour.

But dramatic temperature differences between the warm and cool air masses can cause jet streams to move at much higher speeds — 250 miles per hour or faster.

Speeds this high usually happen in polar jet streams in the winter time.

Jet streams are located about five to nine miles above Earth’s surface in the mid to upper troposphere — the layer of Earth’s atmosphere where we live and breathe.

Airplanes also fly in the mid to upper troposphere.

So, if an airplane flies in a powerful jet stream and they are traveling in the same direction, the airplane can get a boost.

That’s why an airplane flying a route from west to east can generally make the trip faster than an airplane traveling the same route east to west.

The fast-moving air currents in a jet stream can transport weather systems across the United States, affecting temperature and precipitation.

However, if a weather system is far away from a jet stream, it might stay in one place, causing heat waves or floods.

Earth’s four primary jet streams only travel from west to east.

Jet streams typically move storms and other weather systems from west to east.

However, jet streams can move in different ways, creating bulges of winds to the north and south.

Storms tend to follow the edge of the jet stream, where the difference between cool and warm air creates the turbulent conditions for storms. The farther south the jet stream is pushed, the warmer and wetter the air will be where the colder Arctic air meets up with it.

That makes for more thunder and lightning, and more tornadoes.