Ecological systems are sustained by a number of biological, physical, and chemical processes, including primary production (conversion of the sun's energy into organic matter through photosynthesis), and the associated cycling of carbon, nutrients (nitrogen, phosphorus), hydrogen/oxygen, and other elements from the physical environment (air, water, land) through biological organisms and back into the physical environment.

Collectively, ecological processes produce organic matter, transfer carbon and nutrients, drive soil formation, and enable organisms to reproduce. They also play an important role in providing ecological services—for example, providing natural resources, such as food, fiber, and timber, and regulating air and water quality.

1 Ecological processes, such as primary production, influence the extent, distribution, and biodiversity of systems.

Ecological processes can be impacted by both natural forces and human activities happening over different temporal and spatial scales. With respect to natural forces, ecological processes are affected by both small-scale natural events such as seasonal changes in temperature, precipitation, and stream flows and large-scale events such as climate change.

EPA has long been concerned with the impacts of human activities—including pesticide use, chemical use, waste generation, land use changes, and water quality management, among others—on the rates, types, and timing of ecological processes.

Only one indicator that meets the ROE criteria, Carbon Storage in Forests, is available to address this question because ecological processes are difficult to measure directly, particularly at a national scale.

Ecological processes such as primary production, respiration, energy, carbon and nutrient flow through food webs, reproduction, and decomposition are represented as rates of change, which requires repeated measurement over time. This is difficult to achieve for many ecosystems at a local scale and even more difficult at the national scale.

For example, remote sensing imagery has been used to obtain "snapshots" of indicators of ecosystem conditions over time, and to infer ecological processes such as terrestrial net primary production.

The Normalized Difference Vegetation Index has been estimated at a national scale using remote sensing.

Repeated measures over a season might provide an indicator of net primary production.

Indicators for other ecological processes, such as respiration, nutrient cycling, or decomposition have been developed for ecosystems at watershed scales, but have not been developed at the national scale. Developing these indicators at the national scale represents a significant scientific and research challenge.
